Hello and welcome back.
This video, I want to talk about Gaussian
mixture models and its connection to
sparse modeling.
And in particular, this is going to be
useful for us to introduce the concept of
structured sparse models.
Let's get into that.
As examples, we are going to use the same
type of image processing tasks that we
have been using for regular sparse
modeling in the previous videos.
What we have is that from an observation
y, we want to recover the image f.
Now, the image f has been deteriorated by
this operator U and has additive Gaussian
noise as we have seen before.
What type of operators are we going to
consider, are we going to have in mind?
The same type that we have seen before.
For example, U can be the masking.
Basically, we let some pixels go through,
some pixels we block.
This is why, basically, our observation
and we wanted to go back to f via
inpainting.
U can be a convolution, so we're going to
blur the image.
Once again, this is our y,
this is the observation,
and we want to go back to f, do
deblurring.
Or, we can do sub-sampling,
basically, we want to go from a small
image to a larger image and that's
zooming.
So, these are the type of operations that
we are going to think and have in mind.
Now, let us describe the type of models
that we are going to have in mind.
And the basic idea is that, for the
moment, we are not thinking about sparse
modelling for f.
We actually are going to be thinking
about Gaussian mixture models for f.
Now, as we have been doing for sparse
modelling,
we don't work with the whole image,
we work with patches.
Once again, we work with all the
overlapping patches,
all possible patches in the image.
And the idea is that we are going to mold
it,
each one of these patches, f sub i.
Again, that has been deformed.
Sometimes the operator is the same
operator all across the image,
sometimes it's not, and that's why I mark
it U sub i and this is our observation.
The noise is, as before, Gaussian.
Now, we're going to model these signals
with K different Gaussians.
So, basically we have, if the patch is
eight by eight.
We are, we, again, have a 64-dimensional
vector as before, and we are going to
model with K Gaussians, K 64-dimensional
Gaussians.
For a Gaussian, we actually need to
compute the average.
For each one of the K, just to have a
number in our head, we're going to make K
= 10.
We are going to see that we only needed a
few Gaussians.
So, we need to compute the average of
this 64-dimensional vector and the
covariance of this 64-dimensional vector.
Each one of the Gaussians, we need to do
that.
Now, a Gaussian having a model as a
Gaussian is equivalent to having a model
as a PCA or Principal Component Analysis.
The basic idea is that this covariance
matrix, we can compute the item vectors
and the item values and the item vectors
give us a dictionary.
64 atoms in that dictionary if we are in
this dimension.
So each one of the Gaussians, let's say
10,
gives us 64 atoms.
We end up with a dictionary of 640 atoms
in this case, but in a very particular
form, because each block of 64 atoms are
the eigenvectors that correspond to this,
basically, this covariance matrix.
So that's our structure right now. And
the basic idea is that each one of the
patches is modeled by one and only one of
these.
And what we have to do is, from the noisy
image, we are going to have to estimate
the noisy or the blur or the sub sample
image.
If we are talking about in painting, we
are going to have to estimate the
Gaussians, the 10 Gaussians,
meaning, we are going to have to estimate
their average, we are going to have to
estimate their covariance.
That's one thing that we have to
estimate.
We also, are going to have to estimate
for each patch, which one of these K or
10 Gaussians fits that patch the best.
And then, once we do that, we're going to
have to obtain from the observation,
reconstruct the actual image.
So, a lot of things that we are going to
have to do.
Estimate the K Gaussians,
estimate the identity of every patch, and
also then estimate the reconstruction.
It turns out, although, this looks as a
very complicated problem,
it turns out it is not.
It's a very simple problem and it can be
efficiently solved with what's called a
maximum a posteriori expectation
maximization.
The basic idea is that, if we know the
Gaussian,
so, if we know every patch,
the best Gaussian for it.
We have to do nothing else but linear
operations with these type of filters to
do the reconstruction.
So, it's piecewise linear for every
Gaussian, for every Gaussian that we use
to feed the particular patch, we just
need a linear operator and, this is a
very, very, simple algothorim.
Once again, we are approximating
basically every one of the patches, but
by one Gaussian and it's kind of
selecting from this very large
dictionary, one block of 64 atoms which
corresponds to the Gaussian that we are
selecting.
Now, the MAP-EM alternates between the
estimation of the Gaussian and estimation
of the, basically, the appropriate, the
appropriate Gaussian for a given signal
or for a given patch.
So we are doing,
again, we are doing these maximum a
posteriori expectation maximization and
that does more or less the following.
Estimates all of the Gaussians,
then basically says, okay, which patches
like Gaussian number one more than any
other Gaussian,
and then, with all those patches,
reestimates the Gaussian number one.
And it's very similar to what we talk
about the K-SVD, but instead of
estimating the dictionary atoms, we
basically estimate a whole Gaussian,
meaning an average at covariance matrix
or at PCA basis.
And then we keep iterating,
normally, we do that for three, four
iterations until we converge.
What we observe here is we have color
coded this image according to the
Gaussian that a given pixel is selecting.
A pixel meaning the patch around it is
selecting.
This is the initialization, or after one
or two iterations, and this is after
that.
And what we see is that similar regions
of the image end up selecting the same
Gaussian.
Once again, we only allow, in this type
of approach, to select a single Gaussian
for every patch, meaning for every pixel.
And again, we are going to do the
recovery by averaging all the patches
that touch the pixel as we have been
doing for sparse modeling.
So now,
looks like we are not doing sparse
modeling,
looks like what we are doing is
representing every patch as one out of K
Gaussians.
But let's see that what we are actually
doing is a very particular case of sparse
modeling.
Why is that?
In ordinary sparse modeling, we have a
large dictionary,
normally, overcomplete,
and we are allow to select L atoms.
So we have K here, a large K,
and we are allowed to select L atoms.
In this case, three.
And remember, how many options do we
have?
We have L to choose from K, and that is
normally a very large number.
If we take the regular sizes that we are
using for image processing by just which
are 5x5 or 8x8, and then, a dictionary
which is 256 or 512 or 1000, and in
sparsity in the order of five to twelve
five to ten,
this number is about this order.
It's a huge number, a very large number
of subspaces that we can pick from that
has the advantages, the advantage of
being a very rich model, but on the other
hand, makes the model very unstable.
There is so much to choose from than
basically if we make a small change in
the image or in the patch, we might end
up selecting something completely
different.
In, on the other hand, when we are
talking about the Gaussian mixture model,
which as we say, is equivalent,
equivalent to a principal component
analysis.
So we take the covariance matrix and we
decompose it to get the principal
component analysis from the eigenvectors
of the covariance matrix and then we
concatenate them.
So this is one Gaussian,
another Gaussian, another Gaussian,
another Gaussian, and so on.
And we have K Gaussians,
let's say, 10.
Here are the eigenvectors corresponding
to the covariance for the first Gaussian,
the second, the third, the fourth, and so
on.
Here, I show that for five.
Now, when you pick a Gaussian, you pick
the entire block.
And then you'd fit the best you can that
Gaussian or you use the PCA basis as the
atoms of your dictionary.
But look what happened.
We went from this huge number to only
about 10 or 20 options, because once you
pick the Gaussian, I mentioned it's in
your operation, you just project into it
and you already have the atoms.
You already have everything.
So in both cases, you learn the
dictionary.
But here, you learn a dictionary where
every atom is independent and basically
the coding with the atoms is independent.
Here we learn a dictionary that has a
block structure.
And also when you are representing, when
you are projecting, you pick entire
blocks.
And this is a concept that is called
structure sparsity,
where basically, the atoms have
correlations and they're either picked
together or they are not picked at all.
This is a very particular case of what's
called block structure.
There is no overlapping, because you are
only allowed to pick one of the Gaussians
and there is no, basically in principle,
there is no atom that belongs to more
than one of the Gaussians if the
Gaussians are different.
So you only pick one block, which is a
particular case of structure sparsity.
The overall concept of structure
sparsity, being again, the fact that
atoms come and go together.
They'll learn together, they are used to
encode the signals together, and that
stabilizes your system much more because
the number of options is much lower.
You either pick one and not the others or
you pick the other,
but you're not allowed to pick another
from here, another from here, and another
from here,
you pick in blocks.
Now, of course, as before, there is a lot
of very interesting theory here,
but it's also very important to know if
this is actually useful.
If I need 10 million Gaussians, I'm not
gaining much.
But actually, turns out that with 10 or
20 Gaussians, you can get basically some
of the, some of the same results that we
saw for ordinary sparse coding,
but with a much simpler algorithm and a
much more stable one.
So it's,
again, it's sparse coding, sparse
modeling, but in a structure fashion.
Let me show you a few examples of this.
This is one of the examples that we have
seen before,
but now with, with this Gaussian mixture
model or with this structure sparsity.
Or basically, piecewise linear,
because once we picked the Gaussian, we
are in the linear area.
Again, we have the original here,
it's a zoom in to the original,
only 20% available, and here is the right
construction.
We have seen a similar example with
sparse coding.
Now, we are seeing it with the Gaussian
mixture models.
Another example is zooming, we start from
a very small image and we basically zoom
in, we want to make it larger and we get
really, really nice results with this
technique, very sharp edges.
So, this is another type of structure,
another type of sparsity with structure
incorporated and also we get a very
strong connection with a classical model
which is these Gaussian mixture models.
With this, we are actually concluding the
week on sparse models.
We could spend a whole year teaching
about sparse models, but we have provided
the key concepts.
What this part coding, sparse coding, we
have provided the concept of how to learn
the dictionaries, we have provided some
of the theory. We have talked about some
of the computational techniques and we
talked about the relationship between
sparse modeling and more classical
techniques like Gaussian mixture models.
And from that, the new concept of
structure sparsity.
This, as I say, is a topic which is very
active research currently in the image
and signal processing community.
And I hope you have enjoyed this week.
And I'm looking forward to see you next
week once again.
Thank you very much.